# Metrics of Electricity Production
Modern grids don't typically consist solely of a single electricity production technology. Different technologies serve different roles within the grid, some of them supply a cheap and stable supply, some of them have very low emissions but are difficult to control, some excel at providing electricity quickly on demand. We will try to explain some of the most relevant decision-guiding metrics of electricity producing technologies in this article. 
## Introductory information and some examples
To understand the meaning of many of the parameters below it is important to know that they are usually evaluated over the life cycle of a project and either reported as an impact per unit of electricity or rated output. For example you have probably seen the cost of your electricity given to you in CHF/kWh (cost per unit of electricity) and if you've bought solar panels you may have seen their cost given to you in CHF/kW (cost per rated output). Understanding the difference is vital since values reported relative to the rated output may not give you a fair comparison without this understanding.
### Capacity factor
The capacity factor states how 'active' a given electricity producer is and is calculated by dividing the electricity a power plant or other source of electricity produces throughout its life by the electricity it could have produced if it constantly produced 100% of its rated output (*comment: e.g.: a 1kW solar panel has the capacity to produce 8760 kWh. If it only produced 1314 kWh in a given year then the capacity factor for that year is 1314/8760 = 15%). Different methods of generating electricity have different reasons for not operating 100% of the time. Gas fired power plants usually reduce their output when the price of electricity is low, because the cost of fuel is a major driver for the cost of their electricity. Most nuclear power plants have month-long periods of maintenance and refuelling. Solar and wind power are weather dependent in their output, with solar power typically having no meaningful electricity production during the night.
### Life-cycle assessments and project lifetimes
The life cycle assessment (LCA) of a project usually starts with the mining of the materials necessary for the equipment and ends in the recycling or disposal of all materials used in the project (this is called "cradle to grave"). Knowing whether an LCA is taking the "cradle to grave" approach or not is very important in order to understand the meaning of the results. Comparing the life cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of a coal-fired power plant with a similarly sized solar PV installation will yield very different results if you include the emissions from the production of the power plant and solar panels or if you are only looking at operating emissions (i.e coal being burned vs a solar panel just existing). In order to produce comparable numbers we usually take the impacts of a project over its lifetime and divide them by the power produced throughout its lifetime.


## GHG intensity
Different greenhouse gasses have different impacts on climate change, some molecules being more severe in their impact on the global climate than others. Methane is approximately 28 times more effective than carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas per unit of mass, thus 1 kg methane corresponds to 28 kgCO2eq [1][p.47]. The exact behaviour is a bit more complex than this. Not all of these gasses remain in the atmosphere for the same amount of time, thus having different global warming potentials over different time horizons, for instance, the above number for methane refers to the global warming potential it has over the course of 100 years [1][p.47]. Some gasses have additional negative effects, such as depleting ozone (e.g. chlorofluorocarbons [1][p.117] used in old refrigerators), which are not well conveyed with the carbon dioxide equivalence unit. MENTION THAT NUMBERS WE REPORT ARE LIMITED TO THOSE IN THE KYOTO PROTOCOL OR EQUIVALENT AND THAT GASES SUCH AS H2 ARE NOT ACCOUNTED FOR.
Leading sentence into the next section: GHGs are only one of the many pollutants produced during the life-cycle of power plants.
## Pollution
## Health aspects
Will require a deeper article, mortality and morbidity need to be explained here and we link to 'which power source is the safest'
## Scalability
Scaling limits in this document are factors which limit the maximum power that can be produced with an electricity generation method. For renewable energy sources we have provided the amount of energy Switzerland could produce per year with the resources it has. For non-renewable energy we have limited ourselves to scaling limits associated with overall fuel availability, providing the number of years for which the world could be powered if the current primary energy consumption remained constant at the global consumption level of 2021 (595 EJpa [5][p.9]) if all energy were sourced from the generator under investigation and with only those resources which are confirmed to exist and are economically available. This value is not the number of years left of each resource at our current ate of consumption for that resource. Estimating the future global energy consumption is a very complex process, highly dependent on assumptions and consequently few estimates agree with each other, although the average is an increasing trend until at least 2050 [6][p.817]. Estimating the amount of energy that would be consumed per resource is even more assumption dependent and thus we chose to provide a different value which is independent of these assumptions.


- Geographic limitations
    - e.g. only certain places have the geography needed for dams, sun and wind availability differ geographically, thermal PPs need cooling water.
- Fuel limitations
## Land usage
## Piloting potential
Piloting potential describes the degree of control which a producer has over the output of its power generation method. Power demand is not constant; thus, the price of electricity varies. As such, it is desirable to be able to control the amount of power one produces if a valuable commodity is consumed during the production of electricity. The unit used in this document (ramp rate) is the degree to which a generator can change its power output as a percentage of its maximum power per minute once it is operating. Some methods of generating power, such as solar PV and wind, do not allow much control over the output since their output is dependent on environmental circumstances. Wind turbines can be slowed down intentionally, so there is some control over the ramp-down rate.
### Ramp rate
Renewable sources of electricity such as wind and solar power are becoming more prevalent in global electricity production and are usually not pilotable. This leaves gaps in electricity production which need to be filled by alternative electricity producers, necessitating power plants to increase or decrease their production on demand. The rate at which a power plant can change its output, the ramp rate, is usually reported as percentage change of total output by which it can increase or decrease its output per minute. In many electricity networks specialised power producers which focus on very fast delivery of power in shorter windows, such as open cycle gas turbines are needed. These are usually more expensive in their LCOE than their CCGT counterparts since they usually do not operate continuously.

Besides the ramping rate is relevant on a daily basis and shorter time-frames, the time needed to start up a power plant after it has been shut down is important when looking at longer time-frames, as maintenance and extenuating circumstances often require it. The hot start-up time is the time a power plant requires to achieve normal operating conditions after it has been shut down for less than 8 hours (or if the boiler and turbine have been pre-heated on thermal power plants).

Ramping rates are not constant for most power generation methods over their entire spectrum of operation. A cold start (at ignition of fuel for thermal power plants) may mean several hours or even days of operation before the full power output can be achieved. Currently the vast majority of US hydroelectric plants require fewer than 10 minutes to achieve full power from a cold start, whilst the vast majority of the US nuclear power plants require more than 12 hours [4] Shorter start-up times are preferred over longer start-up times. Nuclear power has particularly long start-up times due to reactor poisons being high in concentration shortly after a reactor shutdown, as well as the safety measures which are taken when nuclear reactors start up. Since nuclear reactors are usually shut down at most once per year the long start-up time is not of great importance, as reflected by its relatively high capacity factor. It is not in the interest ...

- Ramp rate
- Daily availability and variance
- Seasonal availability and variance

## Water usage
This section probably won't appear in the final article, but if it did then it would speak about the threat of droughts in the uncertain climate of the future where extreme weather is likely going to become more regular than today (citing historic extreme weather event increase rates). It would then highlight how most electricity sources use water at some point of their life-cycle, every one in the equipment production (because mining and refining require lots of water) and most (barring wind and solar power) also during operation. Interesting data in this section would be the relative water intensity of hydroelectricity and nuclear power, showing the amount of water which currently evaporates per kWh in Swiss hydroelectric dams.

## Costs (e.g. LCOE)
The LCOE is the amount of money which a power producer needs to receive per unit of energy for the life of the power plant to break even. It is calculated by dividing the all of the costs accrued throughout the life of a power producer by the power it produced. This takes into account the capital and operating costs, such as the power plant and fuel, as well as the cost of capital which is associated with necessary bank loans or investors expected returns, namely the discount rate. This latter parameter is particularly important for projects with high capital costs (up-front costs), since the rate of return expected by investors can have a large impact on the overall LCOE. Of the widespread electricity generation methods nuclear power is most sensitive to the discount rate [2] There are more nuanced aspects of calculating an LCOE, but those will not be covered here. Suffice it to say that the LCOE calculation assumes some parameters associated with costs and is summarised as a cost per unit of electricity, such as USD per kWh
